February 5 2026
Progress Report Meeting

Some tweaks to outline sentance structure and vocabulary 
- to be addressed when moving the introduction into a full draft

Sim 1 is getting there. 
Currently working to add epistasis, 
so that mitochondrial and nuclear genes affect fitness through interaction
Looking through William (team memebr of previous project iteration)'s coders

Sim 2 coming along.
Managed to seed poputlation with initial deleterious mutations.
Focusing on tweaks to setup (chromosomes, genomic elements, mutation types)
Sposnor suggested icreased number seeded mutations 
and commented on the apparent "fitness ceiling" of 1.0. Together we decided that this phenomenon
would stiop if beneficial mutations were added.

Figure ideas from sponsor - dual sex/asex boxplot, dual sex/asex fitness-time graph 
for each of the two simulations 



29 January 2026
This week's plan:
1- Finish outline
2- Add meeting notes to GitHub repository

1/29/2026
Github notes
Asex - diploid but the nucleus reproduces asexually
Auto - treat all as autosomes
Mito - mitochondria has high mutation rate
Mito-adj - same as mito but mitochondria without the highermutation rate  
CompensatoryTest.slim - introduce lots of deleteriousn mutations and watch them compensate
PeakFitness.slim - 
We make a Sex_mito and Asex_mito - focus on increased deleterious mutations in mitochondria

Plot scripts and statistical testing




Objectives for model coders:
2- Create the main model for PeakFitness (generations required to reach a peak fitness value) to examine: sex_mito and asex_mito, and verify that it has these criteria-
    i- two autosomes ("nuclear" chromosomes)
    ii- one mitogenome
    iii- mitogenome with both higher mutation rate (and eventually higher deleterious mutation accumulation, which is the case for the mito models in the del directory on the github repository)
    iv- mitogenome is uniparentally inherited
3- Modify that main model for PeakFitness so that there are two "sub"models:
    i- Sex (autosomes recombine, only one of the autosomes gets passed on because the other is passed on by a mate)
4- Create the main model for CompensatoryTest (fitness value after certain number of generations, when there has been a pre-loading of deleterious mutations). This should have the same general criteria as the main model for PeakFitness.
3- Modify that main model for CompensatoryTest so that there are two "sub"models:
    i- Sex (autosomes recombine, only one of the autosomes gets passed on because the other is passed on by a mate)

Objectives for statisticians/figure makers:
1- Look at output from SLiM and decide how they can be handled with a statistical language
2- Examine how data can be depicted visually

6 December 2024
  William presented a poster at the Utah Tech Biology poster session (I added this poster to the meetings folder in the KLab directory on onen drive). Ultimately for the project, I think the next step is figuring out if our Running3 simulations are truly set up where the mitochondrial mutations are deleterious. (RunningFiles and RunningFiles3, which are the "Neut" and "Del" simulations (respectively), are all under Documents/UtahTech/Research).

27 Sept 2024
    Is the mito mut rate (1.55) too high compared to the nuclear mut rate (0.02)? Per Allio et al (2017), it should be ~20x greater for amniotes.

17 Sept 2024
  Some questions/thoughts from Randy:
    Why is the dominance coefficient for the autosomes 0.5 and for the mitochondria 0.1? Is that related to ploidy? Should the mutations of varying selection coefficients be centered on a negative number rather than 0? This may be the reason we see no difference in the mito models- the mito mutation type is so much more frequent (20x more than autosomal [1.55 vs 0.02]), and given that half of the mutations will have positive fitness impact of the mitochondrion is eclipsing that of the nucleus.
    Although this doesn't explain why the mito-adj model would result in a decreased time to peak fitness for the Asex model and an increased time to peak fitness in the Sex model...
    For the initializeRecombinationRates method, does the trailing 0 on the mito rates vector mean anything?


27 June 2024
  William changed the mito mutation and nuclear mutation rates by doing the following: The ratio of nuclear mutations that have an effect on fitness is 1:0.02, and the ratio of mitochondrial mutations that have an effect on fitness is 1:1.55. This means that mitochondrial mutations that have an effect on fitness appear at 20x the rate of nuclear mutations.
  Action plan:


20 June 2024
  Action plan:
    1. Increase mito mutation rate to 20x that of the autosomal mutation rate
    2. Loading the genomes with fixed mutations

6 June 2024
  William created a new file that has a toggle ability to change the mitochondrial gene into an autosome (it becomes diploid and biparentally inherited). Additionally, he added haploid asex as another model. This file is called MitoToggle.slim..
  Now the next challenge is starting the simulation with a number of deleterious mutations that are fixed in the mitochondrial genome and need to be compensated for in the nuclear genome, and we measure this by seeing how long it takes to maximize do so for the different repro modes. So for next week, William will see if he can load the mitochondrial genomes with fixed mutations at peak fitness (i.e., following the completion of the simulation we used for the spring 2024 poster). Given these
  mutations will be random, there is no need to make sure they are deleterious (since it is at peak fitness, a number of random mutations will move it off peak fitness- having the same effect as deleterious mutations)

21 February 2024
  Today we talked about the unisexual vertebrate perspective paper and potentially adding simulated data to it.
  We also talked about the parameters being used for the simulations, specifically those for fitness of the mutations. William is going to see if he can plot out the distributions being sampled from for Randy's simple mind (Randy wrote this using his simple mind).
  William also tried making the fitness value for each nuclear mutation a function where the effect (starting fitness vale of the mutation) is raised to the power of the number of mitochondrial mutations. However, this made it so that with deleterious nuclear mutations, any mitochondrial mutation that arose has a deleterious effect on the nuclear mutation. This may present a problem when negative nuclear mutations are fixed before any mitochondrial mutations arise.
  William is going to tinker with mutation rates to see if he can increase the rate of mitochondrial mutations compared to nuclear mutations.
  Additionally, I added the dissertation of Manisha Munasinghe to the "Literature" repository, and here is one of her repositories focused on mitonuclear simulting in SLiM: https://github.com/mam737/mito_nuclear_SLiMulations

14 February 2024
  William figured out how to model the mitochondrion by implementing the modifychild method- this takes the maternal mitochondrial genome (the first genome in the SLiM script) and writes over the paternal genome (the second genome in the SLiM script).
  This makes the mito genome both functionally haploid and uniparentally inherited.
  The model as a whole works like this: Baby is born. Baby mutates. Baby is modified. Gametes are formed, and Baby becomes parent.
  Overall we will look at how population size changes between different reproductive modes across time. Additionally, it would be interesting to look at the interaction between repro mode and changes in parameters (recomb rate, mutattion rate, fitness, pop size (initial), mito size, amount of epistasis)

  Of the three primary problems we described on January 24, William has figured out solutions for problem 1 (different repro modes) and  problem 3 (mitochondrial and nuclear DNA).

7 February 2024
  William thought of the cool idea to create a haploid genome for the mitochondrion by simply replacing one of the genomes in an individual with the other. He is going to look into using the modifychild method to do this, with a focus on the simulate a gene drive section (12.3 in SLiM manual).

31 January 2024
  William figured out how to: (A) create scenario where a divergence event leads to an asexually-reproducing lineage and a sexually reproducing lineage and (B) set up the Muller's ratchet scenario.
  So, problem 1 (described in January 24 meeting notes) is solved!
  -- He actually created three populations: (1) Multiple-mate sexually-reproducing lineage, (2) Selfing sexually-reproducing lineage, and (3) Clonal lineage.
  -- The simulation shows an interesting interaction between repro mode and population size over time
  THIS WEEK: William will read through section 14.5 to see if modeling the Y chromosome wiht psuedo-autosomal regions could be co-opted to model the mitochondrion. The challenge is making sure the mito portion gets inherited by 100% of the offspring (which doesn't occur with the Y chromosome) while still only being transferred by a single parent. However, for now it is okay if the "mito" region is biparentally inherited and simply is a region where no recombination happens.

24 January 2024
  William and I identified 3 primary problems to solve for this project:
	1- Splitting population into sexually reproducing and asexually reproducing lineages
	2- Create two chromosomes where one can recombine and the other can't
		NOTE: This is the way it will be in the sexually reproducing populations.
	              In the asex repro pops both won't be able to recombine
	3- Create a measure of fitness from the interaction between the two chromosomes created in 2

  This week William will address problem 1 above. He will create a SLiM script that:
	- Starts with a single population
	- Runs for 1000 generations
	- Splits off a subpopulation
	- Sets the new subpopulation as asexually reproducing (using methods in SLiM)
	- Run for 1000 more generations

17 January 2024
  William installed ubuntu and cloned the git repository
  This week he will work through the rest of Chapter 4 and move into 5.2.3
  For next week: Show William how to push to main branch and write out project objectives in detail (in ReadMe.md)

